# Genetics in computational terms

tags: complexity-notes, notes, complexity, complex science, complex adaptive systems, evolution, computation, biology,genetics, quotes

Ref: *Krakauer, D.C The Complexity of the Gene Concept . SFI Bulletin. (2009 ). Essay on the nature of the gene concept arising from a meeting with this title at SFI.*

> “DNA or RNA, transcribed and translated into a unique protein, with unambiguous expression and quantifiable selective value, has always been an ideal rather than a reality. Under most definitions the gene has been presumed to perform three functions: to serve as a unit of inheritance, a regulatory element in developmental dynamics, and an atomic unit of selection. In each case there is a mutable component, well behaved and easily identifiable, that survives cell division, can be turned on and off as a unit through suitable regulatory pathways, and contributes a quantum of fitness to an organism when expressed. The work—contribution to heritable, regulatory or selective variance—in each of these cases is presumed to be done by the gene, and so the gene occupies, understandably, a central position. [...] We might think about this modified gene concept in computational terms as some procedural element, or function, instantiated in sequences of code, contributing to one or more adaptive behaviors. The procedure or function describes the set of regulatory operations to be executed in some systematic fashion to generate a stable transcript. The code that furnishes the arguments for the function is the ordered collection of nucleotides stored in an enzyme-readable form distributed over the genome. And the final output of the procedure is the modification of phenotypic variability through contributions to cellular function. The gene is thereby a computational, or algorithmic element, exploiting underlying sequence structures, and is not merely a distributed structure itself.”