# Notes about event-related potentials (ERPs)

tags: neuroscience, cognitive science, eeg-notes, embodied cognition, eeg, research, neurophenomenology, philosophy of mind, experiments, brain, situated, sciart, erp, notes

## Arriving to neuroscience

In 2013 I was collaborating with the **Cognitive Neuroscience Center** at the **UCM-ISCIII for Human Evolution and Behavior**.

At the time I had a strong background in Computer Science, Artificial Intelligence and Systems Biology, but I really wanted to learn more in detail about Neuroscience. Affordable MOOCs were a good resource to get into the field and Coursera and EdX were already available. So I invested my short free time studying online courses from Duke University, MIT or the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. 

I was working full time in IT, and volunteering some hours for the Cognitive Neuroscience Center. Unfortunately, not as much as I wanted but usually, once a week, I meet with Manuel Martín-Loeches and learnt about cognitive neuroscience and EEG. Thanks to Manuel I could have an initial approach to software like SPM, Presentation or EEGLAB, a cool interactive Matlab toolbox for continuous and event-related EEG developed by the University of California at San Diego. I also studied the lab's ERP data, read research papers and got immersed in neuroscience books while enjoying the background noise of coffee shops. Some of the notes of that time are here.


## Definition of ERP

> An event-related potential (ERP) is the measured brain response that is the direct result of a specific sensory, cognitive, or motor event. [...] an electrophysiological response to a stimulus. The study of the brain in this way provides a noninvasive means of evaluating brain functioning.

> ERPs are measured by means of electroencephalography (EEG). The magnetoencephalography (MEG) equivalent of ERP is the ERF, or event-related field. Evoked potentials and induced potentials are subtypes of ERPs.  [See source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Event-related_potential)


## Components

> The N400 is a component of time-locked EEG signals known as event-related potentials (ERP). It is a negative-going deflection that peaks around 400 milliseconds post-stimulus onset, although it can extend from 250-500 ms, and is typically maximal over centro-parietal electrode sites. The N400 is part of the normal brain response to words and other meaningful (or potentially meaningful) stimuli, including visual and auditory words, sign language signs, pictures, faces, environmental sounds, and smells.
The N400 is a component of time-locked EEG signals known as event-related potentials (ERP). It is a negative-going deflection that peaks around 400 milliseconds post-stimulus onset, although it can extend from 250-500 ms, and is typically maximal over centro-parietal electrode sites. The N400 is part of the normal brain response to words and other meaningful (or potentially meaningful) stimuli, including visual and auditory words, sign language signs, pictures, faces, environmental sounds, and smells.

>  The N400 is a negative component, relative to reference electrodes placed on the mastoid processes (the bony ridge behind the ear), and relative to a 100 ms pre-stimulus baseline. Its amplitude can range from -5 to 5 microvolts. However, it is important to note that in studies using the N400 as a dependent measure, the relative amplitude of the waveform compared to another experimental condition (the "N400 effect") is more important than its absolute amplitude. The N400 itself is not always negative—it is just a more negative-going deflection than that seen to other conditions. Its distribution is maximal over centro-parietal electrode sites, and is slightly larger over the left side of the head for visual words, although the distribution can change slightly depending on the eliciting stimulus. [See source](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/N400)


## EEG

* See notes, concepts and articles tagged as [eeg](#!tags/eeg.md)


## Psycholinguistics 

### Psycholinguistics Electrified 

By Marta Kutas, Cyma K. Van Petten, Robert Kluender

> At the scalp an ERP (5-10uV) is substantially smaller in amplitude than the background EEG (50-100 uV) and is, therefore, generally extracted by computer averaging. This involves recording ERPs to repeated presentations of conceptually, if not physically, similar stimuli. Voltage fluctuations generated by neurons, unrelated (or at least not phase-locked) to the processing of the stimuli of interest will be random with respect to stimulus onset time and thus cancel each other, leaving a record of event-related activity. The number of stimuli needed for a reliable average is a function of the amplitude of the ERP component and the question under study: the smaller the component, the more trials that are needed to extract it from the spontaneous EEG (“noise”). The major statistical assumption in averaging is that the signal is indeed time locked to the averaging trigger whereas the “noise” is not. For the early "sensory" portion of the ERP, the time-locking assumption is well-supported. In the case of later portions of the ERP which are instead elicited by higher-level "cognitive" analyses of the stimulus, the latency of the signal may not be invariant with regard to stimulus onset on a trial by trial basis, but there are techniques to
correct for misalignment.

> The ERP waveform of voltage plotted against post-stimulus time consists of a series of positive and negative peaks; these are typically compared to a pre-stimulus baseline, that is a short (100-200 ms) record of activity (or preferably inactivity) immediately preceding each experimental stimulus, although other baselines are possible. Voltages are thus only negative or positive with respect to
the baseline.

> The ERP peaks are typically labeled according to their polarity (negative [N] or positive [P]) and latency in milliseconds relative to stimulus onset (e.g., N100, P230, P300). Occasionally, peaks are designated by their polarity and ordinal position in the waveform (e.g., N1, P1, N2). Sometimes, the labels denote a functional description (e.g., mismatch negativity or MMN) or refer to its
presumed neural generator (e.g., auditory brainstem response) or its most reliable scalp location (e.g., LAN or left anterior negativity). The mix of descriptive and functional labels brings us to the distinction between an ERP peak, readily observed by the eye, and the more abstract concept of a "component" (see Allison, Wood & McCarthy, 1986; Donchin, Ritter & McCallum, 1978).

#### VISUAL WORD RECOGNITION

> Allison and colleagues recorded evoked potentials directly from the cortical surface to a variety of visual stimui -- sinusoidal gratings, pictures of faces, word and nonword letter strings, number strings, and animate (butterflies) and inanimate (cars) objects, etc, -- in a large number of patients with intractable seizures (Allison, McCarthy, Nobre, Puce & Belger, 1994; Allison, Puce, Spencer
& McCarthy, 1999). The earliest activity in the visual cortex (V1 and V2) was evidenced by N100 and P100 components which are sensitive to luminance, luminance contrast, and stimulus size but not to stimulus category. Other relatively early responses in posterior visual cortex were sensitive to sinuosoidal
gratings (P120-N180-P260). Approximately 20-30 ms later, category-specific activations were observed in more ventral areas (e.g., P150-N200-N290-N700). For instance, several different cortical patches within extrastriate cortex generated surface negativities with peak latencies around 200 ms (N200), but different patches were specific to faces, objects, or letter strings (Allison et al. 1994; Nobre et al. 1994). Letter-string specific areas in the posterior fusiform gyrus responded equally to words and nonwords, whereas the anterior fusiform gyrus was sensitive to properties of letter strings (Nobre et al., 1994). On the surface of the anterior fusiform gyrus, bilaterally, a P400 component was specific
to real words; a potential of the opposite polarity (N400) was observed just superior to this region, indicating locally-generated activity (McCarthy et al. 1995). Overall, depth recordings reflect the segregation of the ventral object recognition system into functionally discrete regions.

## Online material

* Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience MIT: https://ocw.mit.edu/high-school/biology/introduction-to-cognitive-neuroscience/video-lectures/lecture-1/
* Awesome BCI Resources: https://github.com/NeuroTechX/awesome-bci
* EEG Notebooks by NeuroTechX: https://eeg-notebooks.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html